Chapter 10 – Implementing Telemetry and Observability in the Cloud

Cloud Native applications are distributed, frequently updated, and composed of many small services. To operate them reliably, teams must implement strong telemetry and observability practices. This chapter summarizes the core concepts required for the KCNA exam.

Telemetry and Observability

Telemetry

Telemetry refers to the monitoring and collection of data about system performance. It includes three primary signal types:

Logs – Text-based event records generated by applications, operating systems, or appliances.

Metrics – Numeric measurements collected over time (CPU usage, memory, request rate).

Traces – End-to-end request tracking across distributed systems.

These signals help operators understand system behavior and identify issues.

Observability

Observability is the capability to generate actionable insights from telemetry signals. An observable system provides the right data at the right time to make informed decisions.

Observability requires all three telemetry types. Relying on only logs or only metrics is insufficient for modern distributed systems.

Logs

Logs record events such as restarts, API calls, errors, or user actions. They typically include:

Timestamp

Severity level (DEBUG, INFO, WARNING, ERROR, CRITICAL)

Message text

Additional metadata (user ID, status code, etc.)

Logs are essential for troubleshooting but must be complemented with metrics and traces.

Metrics

Metrics are time-series measurements collected at regular intervals. They allow trend analysis, forecasting, and autoscaling decisions.

Examples:

CPU and memory utilization

Request latency

Queue length

Number of active connections

Metrics should be collected frequently (e.g., every 30 seconds to a few minutes) for meaningful analysis.

Tracing

Tracing tracks how requests flow through microservices. It reveals:

Which services handle a request

How long each step takes

Where bottlenecks occur

Tools such as Jaeger and Zipkin visualize traces and help diagnose performance issues.

OpenTelemetry (OTel)

OpenTelemetry provides vendor-neutral APIs, SDKs, and tools for generating and exporting logs, metrics, and traces. It supports many languages and integrates with popular observability backends.

Prometheus for Monitoring and Alerting

Prometheus is a CNCF Graduated project and the industry standard for Cloud Native monitoring.

Time Series Database (TSDB)

Prometheus stores metrics in a TSDB optimized for timestamped data. Metrics can be queried using PromQL.

Pull vs Push Models

Pull model (dominant) – Prometheus scrapes /metrics endpoints via HTTP.

Push model – Used for short-lived jobs via Pushgateway.

Labels

Metrics include labels that provide context (namespace, pod name, method, status code). Labels enable powerful filtering and aggregation.

Exporters

Exporters expose metrics for applications that do not natively support Prometheus. Examples include:

Node Exporter

PostgreSQL Exporter

Redis Exporter

NGINX Exporter

Exporters often run as sidecar containers in Kubernetes.

Alertmanager

Alertmanager handles alert notifications via email, SMS, chat, or other channels. Alerts trigger when metrics cross defined thresholds.

Prometheus can also predict future threshold crossings using time-series analysis.

FinOps and Cost Management

FinOps is a cloud financial management discipline focused on maximizing business value through collaboration between engineering, finance, and operations.

Cloud Pricing Models

On-demand – Pay only while resources run; most flexible.

Reserved instances – Commit for 1–3 years; large discounts but reduced flexibility.

Spot instances – Deeply discounted spare capacity; can be terminated at any time.

Rightsizing

Rightsizing ensures instance sizes match workload needs. It includes:

Autoscaling to adjust capacity dynamically

Choosing appropriate CPU/RAM configurations

Selecting instance types optimized for specific workloads

Effective rightsizing reduces waste and improves cost efficiency.

Summary

Telemetry consists of logs, metrics, and traces.

Observability requires combining all telemetry signals.

Prometheus provides monitoring, alerting, and a TSDB for time-series metrics.

Exporters enable Prometheus to monitor non-native applications.

FinOps emphasizes cost-aware cloud operations.

Rightsizing and autoscaling help balance performance and cost.

Practice Questions

Which telemetry signals are valid? (Logs, Metrics, Traces)

What is Prometheus’ dominant collection model? (Pull)

What enables Prometheus to collect metrics from non-native apps? (Exporters)

Which signals does Prometheus collect? (Metrics)

Which component allows applications to push metrics? (Pushgateway)






Chapter 11 – Automating Cloud Native Application Delivery

Modern Cloud Native applications evolve rapidly and require highly automated delivery processes. This chapter explains how CI/CD, GitOps, and Infrastructure as Code (IaC) work together to deliver reliable, frequent, and safe software updates.

Delivery of Cloud Native Applications

Cloud Native applications often consist of many microservices. Delivering them manually is slow and error‑prone, so automation is essential.

Release

A release is a version of software containing new features, fixes, or enhancements. Releases use semantic versioning (e.g., v1.0.0).

Automation enables:

Faster delivery

More stable releases

Higher productivity

Fewer bugs through automated testing

Repeatable, predictable results

Application delivery follows a continuous lifecycle:

CODE → BUILD → TEST → RELEASE → DEPLOY → OPERATE → MONITOR → PLAN

Automation allows teams to ship updates multiple times per day and roll back quickly when needed.

CI/CD and GitOps

Continuous Integration (CI)

CI automates building and testing code whenever developers commit changes. It ensures the software is always in a working state.

Continuous Delivery (CD)

CD packages tested code into artifacts (container images, binaries) and stores them in registries. Deployment requires human approval.

Continuous Deployment

Fully automates deployment to development, testing, or production environments once tests pass.

CI/CD Pipeline

A pipeline is a sequence of automated jobs:

Build

Test

Analyze

Package

Deploy

Small, frequent releases reduce risk and improve stability.

Popular CI/CD Tools

ArgoCD

Jenkins

GitLab CI

Tekton

GitHub Actions

Spinnaker

FluxCD

GoCD

CircleCI

TravisCI

GitOps

GitOps extends CI/CD by using Git as the single source of truth for infrastructure and application configuration.

GitOps Core Elements

Merge Requests (MRs) – Code review, collaboration, audit trail.

Infrastructure as Code (IaC) – Declarative configuration stored in Git.

CI/CD Automation – Ensures environments match Git definitions.

Infrastructure Drift

Infrastructure drift occurs when the live environment differs from the desired state defined in IaC. GitOps eliminates drift by overwriting manual changes.

GitOps Tools

ArgoCD

FluxCD

Jenkins X

These tools continuously sync Git changes to Kubernetes clusters.

Example Scenario

If someone manually deletes a Kubernetes Deployment, GitOps tools detect drift and automatically recreate missing resources based on Git definitions.

Infrastructure as Code (IaC)

IaC describes infrastructure using declarative definition files. Tools apply these definitions to create or update resources.

Benefits of IaC

Faster setup

Reproducible environments

Human‑readable configuration

Stored in version control

Eliminates drift

Terraform Example

terraform {
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "~> 4.16"
    }
  }
  required_version = ">= 1.2.0"
}

provider "aws" {
  region = "eu-central-1"
}

resource "aws_instance" "kcna_demo_vm" {
  ami           = "ami-051835d754b74795c"
  instance_type = "t3.medium"

  tags = {
    Name = "KCNAExampleInstance"
  }
}

This file provisions a VM in AWS. IaC can also manage load balancers, storage, firewall rules, and more.

Kubernetes itself uses declarative configuration, making it a natural fit for IaC and GitOps.

Summary

CI automates build and test stages.

CD packages and prepares releases.

Continuous Deployment automates deployment.

GitOps combines CI/CD, IaC, and Git for full automation.

IaC defines infrastructure declaratively and eliminates drift.

Tools like ArgoCD, FluxCD, Jenkins X, and Terraform enable Cloud Native delivery.

Practice Questions

What does CI mean? (Continuous Integration)

Which stages are part of CI? (Build, Test)

What does CD stand for? (Continuous Delivery, Continuous Deployment)

What is a CI/CD practice? (Frequent, small, well‑tested automated releases)

Which tools support GitOps? (Jenkins X, FluxCD, ArgoCD)

What elements are part of GitOps? (CI/CD, IaC, Merge Requests)

Which VCS is used with GitOps? (Git)

What is infrastructure drift? (Live state differs from IaC definition)

What should NOT be done in GitOps? (Manual changes in live environment)

What is defined with IaC? (VMs, load balancers, firewall rules)

Benefits of GitOps? (Faster delivery, stability, automation)

Benefits of CI? (Automatic builds/tests, issue detection)

What is a release? (Version of software delivered to users)

CI/CD tool? (GitLab CI)

What triggers GitOps deployment? (Merged MR/PR)

True about GitOps? (Overwrite manual changes, declarative config)

Stages NOT part of CI/CD? (Monitor, Plan)



Chapter 12 – Practicing for the KCNA Exam with Mock Papers

This chapter provides practical guidance for preparing for the Kubernetes and Cloud Native Associate (KCNA) exam. It includes exam tips, rules, and two full mock exams to help you evaluate your readiness.

About the KCNA Exam

KCNA is an entry‑level certification offered by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF). It tests foundational knowledge across:

Kubernetes architecture and resources

Cloud Native concepts

CI/CD and GitOps

Observability

Microservices and container fundamentals

Exam Format

Online, remotely proctored

60 multiple‑choice questions

90 minutes

Single screen only

Webcam and microphone required

Rules & Environment

No notes, books, or external materials

No public spaces or other people in the room

No eating; water in a transparent container allowed

If internet drops, you may rejoin but time continues

Official Resources

https://www.cncf.io/certification/kcna/

https://training.linuxfoundation.org/certification/kubernetes-cloud-native-associate/

Exam Strategy Tips

Read each question fully before choosing an answer.

If unsure, mark the question and move on.

Don’t spend too long on any single question.

After answering all questions, return to marked ones.

Stay calm and maintain a steady pace.

Mock Exam A

Correct answers are in the Appendix of the book.

Below is the complete mock exam (60 questions). Only the first and last questions are shown here for brevity.

1. You're planning a deployment of a Kubernetes cluster in your organization. There is a requirement to make the control plane highly available. How many control plane nodes should be deployed?

A. 1B. 2C. 3D. 4

...

60. Which of the following container runtimes adds an intermediate kernel layer between the host kernel and containers that become sandboxed?

A. containerdB. gVisorC. KataD. dockerd

Scoring

Number of correct answers × 100 / 60 = Your score (%)

If your score is lower than expected, revisit weak topics and attempt Mock Exam B after a break.

Mock Exam B

Correct answers are in the Appendix of the book.

1. Which of the following are valid telemetry signals?

A. Measurements, traces, logsB. Pings, traces, logsC. Metadata, traces, logsD. Metrics, traces, logs

2. Your organization is running Kubernetes, and the development team asked whether it would be possible to run Serverless applications with it. Which of the following projects can be used to implement your own Serverless platform on top of Kubernetes? Pick two:

A. KnativeB. OpenFaaSC. KubeVirtD. KubeConf

...

(Full exam continues with 60 questions.)

Summary

KCNA is a theoretical exam but requires basic Kubernetes hands‑on familiarity.

Follow exam rules carefully to avoid disqualification.

Use both mock exams to measure readiness.

Review weak areas and retake the mock exams until confident.

You are now ready for the final chapter, which provides exam‑day guidance and post‑certification recommendations.